---
layout: post
title: Project 1. The association with air Pollution and the IPF disease
categories: projects
description: >
  Process log (wordy README) for the IPF analysis
sitemap: false
---
Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis(IPF) is a disease that fiberise the lungs and it is a rare disease. You might have heard of it due to COVID-19 as it was identified to be one of the side effects that corona leaves. However, what cause IPF has been unknown in the medical field. In terms of rising curiosity in the relation between air pollution and pulmonary, this project aims to find the assiociation between air pollutants such as NO2, O3, PM10 and PM2.5 and IPF exacerbation. Normally it would be easier for me to introduce the data and result in detail to make the explanation simple, however, medical dataset are vulnerable to the privacy issue. Hence this post will be describing the analysis flow rather than sharing the detailed results. Hope you get what I've learnt from the project through reading this and any feedbacks are welcomed always :))

* Introduction
* Data Preparation
* Models
  * Initial model and limitations
  * Additional model
* Results and comments
{:toc}

## Introduction

This project was requested from Saint Mary's Hospital Pulmonology. The requester wanted to see the assiociation of IPF exacerbation and air pollution using the NHIS(National Health Insurance Services) data set and the Air Korea data set. *FYI : The former provides the medical information based on insurance bill and the latter gives all the air pollution data that measured in South Korea.*

NHIS has almost every South Korean's medical records thanks to the amazing insurance system. All information comes from bills such as medical centre/clinic bills or medication purchases. One can see almost all medical process that a person went through, however, much detailed information such as certain medical test results is not provided. 

This post will most likely be my diary on the project. I'll write down what I've done and limitations I had. To give you the hints of following writings, I've mainly done survival analysis. 

## Data Preparation

For no single NHIS data will show up in this post, I'd like to talk on how I've delt with the air pollution dataset from Air Korea. The access to the NHIS is highly restricted. So it is impossible to take out the targeted patients' address to match the air pollution information. NHIS provides the patients' address up to the city/gun/gu base and I've geocoded all the city/gun/gu in South Korea. I matched those smallest districts with the nearest air pollution measurement spot from Air Korea. You can see the details of processing air pollution dataset in [here: git hub codes를 그냥 그대로 올리자 여기에는 ^^].

According to some references, NO2 and O3(only from 10:00 to 18:00) play a big role in the IPF exacerbation. This project particularly aimed to additionaly see the impact of PM10 and PM2.5. The mean, max and number of exceeding the given standard(from Air Korea) were calculated for each pollutant in daily unit. To account for the lag time effect, the values are averaged for previous 42 days (6 weeks). Many references found out that any other time (neither longer nor shorter) showed lesser relation. I've created average for 56 days for the sake of exploration. 

Like any other data analysis, defining the target and targeted subjects 

## Models

Several models were discussed for the analysis: cox regression, logistic regression, negative binomial regression or Poisson regression. However, to see the air pollution's impact in more detailed format, to make the imformation aggregated didn't seem to appropriate. Also, we wanted to find the factors that can also account for the time to. Hence [cox regression model]({% link stat/_posts/2020-09-04-stat-sv1.md %}) was to be the go-to analysis method in the begining. 

### Initial model and limitations

However, things went very differently from the expectation. The HR for the NO2 and O3 are always less than 1 in any combinations of covariates. With this 'nonsense' result, I reviewed all the process from the beginning again. However the only limiation so far was quite mediocre  that the provided address was collected in the begining of the year(ther)

residual diagnositic -> to see if it the hazard is actually proportional

confound effect/ missingness of critical covariates (that could divided the cases if s/he is mild or sever IPF patient)

### Additional model

[Frailty model] was considered to induce the impact of the **unobeserved/missing covariates**: results of Pulmonary Funciton Test results (FEV or DLco values). I've tried to set the random effect as the patient itself or certain clusters, but it didn't lead me to the expection either. 

## Results and comments

* The power of references

  I should've asked the FEV and DLco's impact on IPF to the requester right after reading the references. All the references put them as covariates and without being aware of its clinical meanings, I merely focused on the air pollutant dataset. Missing those strongly effecitive variables was the primary limitation of this project. 

* Reflecting the methods that I could've tried in terms of statistics.

  However, I should not be just frustrated with the missingness. I could try and look for various ways to tackle the strong confound effect...!
