---
layout: post
title: www
categories: [p1]
description: >
  Survival anadddate censoring, hazard function and nonparametric survival analysis(KM estimator)
sitemap: false
---
dddd
$$f(t)=lim_{dt \rightarrow 0}\frac{1}{dt}P(t\leq T_i < t+dt)$$
$f(t)$ is the limiting quantity that describes the likelihood of $T_i$ to fall in the very short interval after time $t$. To simply put, it is *the probability of event happens almost right after time t* 

### Survival Function $S(t)$
Then what should we know? We are interested in *how long the subject survives*. Therefore, we should look up the probability of the event happens longer than time $t$! $$S(t)=P(T_i>t)=1-F(t)$$ As the $F(t)$ is an increasing function from 0, $S(t)$ decreases from 1: that is the survival probability of subject $i$ falls over time. If $S(\inf)=0$ we say it is *proper* survival function. If somebody is cured it will never reach 0 even after forever.  

### Hazard Function $\lambda(t)$
Then you might want to see the *how dangerous a subject is* at each time: the RISK.  So you want to narrow the focus of failure time only for those who already survived, which leads ous to the hazard function!
$$\lambda(t) = lim_{dt\rightarrow0^+}\frac{1}{dt}P(t\leq T_i < t+dt|T_i\geq t)=\frac{f(t)}{S(t)}$$ It is a **limiting conditional rate**  that that measures the rate of failure in $[t,t+dt)$ when the failure has not occured at time $t$. It is **instantaneous** rate as the $dt$ is really short! 

The hazard function has several different names : Hazard rate, Conditional failure rate, the intensity rate. Why ***rate***? You may think it looks like a density function, however, the hazard rate is never a probability if the $T_i$ is *continuous*; as it is a probability divided by $dt$ + it could be >1. (elaboration is needed Kangki!!) However, if the $T_i$ is discrete, it is a probability.

Cumulative hazard $\Lambda(t)$ is used for the convenience. As the hazard itself can not be monotonic as $F(t)$ or $S(t)$, calculating it directly can be very complicating. So we sum up!$$\Lambda(t)=\int_o^t \lambda(s)ds$$ $\Lambda(t)$ measures the total amount of risk that has been accumulated up to time $t$.  

I'd fancy give you a intuition on each functions, however, $\Lambda(t)$ is more like a tool for the sake of mathematical convenience. As you all recognised all functions ($F(t), f(t), S(t), \lambda(t)$) can be linked/expressed if you define only one of it. If you introduce $\Lambda(t)$ in that procedure, it will be much more convenient. 

IF the data is count data, $\Lambda(t)$ gives a expected  the number of failure times over a given period, if only the failure event were repeatable:  the expected number of deaths of an individual up to time $t$ if the individual were to be resurrected after each death (without resetting time to zero). I'd leave a great comment that I can relate on this

> I would emphasize that the cumulative hazard function does not have a nice interpretation, and as such I would not try to use it as a way to interpret results; telling a non-statistical resdddddd
